26 June 2007Cabinet held its ordinary meeting this morning, 26 June 2007 in Pretoria. The meeting received progress reports from Cabinet Committees on the implementation of Government s Programme of Action. Cluster media briefings will be held during the week beginning 2 July, to inform the public about progress in implementing the programme. Cabinet noted the publication by The Presidency, of the Development Indicators mid-term Review, as part of the establishment of a government-wide monitoring and evaluation system. The indicators show an overall picture of progress together with some major challenges. The meeting agreed that the indicators should be made widely available in an accessible form, as part of government s commitment to transparency and democratic accountability. The publication is available on the Government online website: www.info.gov.za. The meeting noted that the Pan African Infrastructure Development Fund will be launched during the African Union summit in Ghana. The Fund, with its Head Office in South Africa, has raised capital (US$ 625m), for investment in infrastructure on the African Continent. With a target of US$ 1bn, it will be the largest infrastructure fund ever established on the continent. It will help dispel notions of Africa as a high-risk investment destination. South Africa s Public Investment Commission has played a leading role in establishing the fund. Cabinet noted that South Africa will host the 46th annual session of the Asian-African Legal Consultative Organisation, from 30 June to 6 July in Cape Town. The Commission serves as an advisory body to its member states in the field of international law, and as a forum for Asian-African co-operation in legal matters of common concern. Cabinet noted that today is International Day against Substance Abuse and Drug Trafficking. The day is being marked by events across the country including the launch of a school-based prevention and early intervention programme. The objective is to build awareness of the issues, and to mobilise stakeholders in the fight against drugs. In the context of recent incidents in the Western Cape, Cabinet reiterated the urgency of police action to deal with the scourge of substance abuse and illicit drug trafficking. The meeting also urged communities not to take the law into their own but to work closely with the law enforcement agencies in implementing government s programme to deal with this scourge. Cabinet approved the re-designation of the World health Organisation (WHO) country representative from WHO Liaison to WHO Representative. The Department of Health will work with the WHO to select a suitable candidate for this post. The meeting approved the implementation of the International Health Regulations (IHR) relating to pandemic Influenza and the designation of the National IHR Focal Point for the management and prevention of the spread of such diseases. These regulations provide the legal framework for the global community to improve the management of acute health risks that could spread internationally, and help contain these at source. The department of health will implement these regulations with immediate effect. The following appointments were approved: The Local Government Laws Amendment Bill was approved for submission to Parliament. Enquiries Themba Maseko - Government Spokesperson Cell: 083 645 0810 Issued by: Government Communications (GCIS)top