25 January 2007Cabinet held its first ordinary meeting of the year in Pretoria on 23 January 2007. This meeting preceded the January Cabinet Lekgotla which was held from 23 to 25 January 2007. As is normally the case, the Cabinet Lekgotla reviewed the implementation of government's programme of action in 2006 and identified key priorities for 2007. The outcome of the Lekgotla will be communicated by the President in his State of the Nation Address in Parliament on 9 February 2007. The decisions of the Lekgotla will constitute the government's programme of action for the year. The Cabinet meeting received a report on the project to review and assess the senior management service in the public sector. This review covered matters such as recruitment, selection and measures to retain the services of senior managers in the public service. The report was noted and it was agreed that more work will be done to deal with other matters such as standardising recruitment and selection, refining mechanisms to deal with transfers and secondment of senior managers in the public service. The Governance and Administration cluster will finalise the matter for submission to the July 2007 Lekgotla. The meeting approved the State Owned Enterprises (SOEs) supplier development policy. This policy is aimed at maximising the impact of large scale capital and related operational expenditure programmes of SOEs on shared growth. The meeting resolved that more work would be done to align the SOE Competitive Supplier Development Programme with the National Industrial Participation Programme (NIPP). Cabinet noted that preparations for the hosting of the Fourth World Congress of Rural Women (WCRM), to be held in Durban from 19 to 26 April, were on track. An Inter-Ministerial Committee (IMC) was set up to oversee the preparations for this historic congress. The IMC will consist of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Social Development, Finance, Education, Safety and Security, Minister in the Presidency, Health and Home Affairs. The following appointments were approved: Enquiries Themba Maseko Cell: 083 645 0810 Issued by: Government Communications (GCIS)top